.\"
.Dd November 07, 2016
.Dt cipherdiff 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cipherdiff
.Nd diff ciphersuites between a server and a spec
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl Vcdhpuv
.Op Fl o Ar openssl
.Op Fl s Ar spec
.Ar server
.Op port
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
tool will report the list of SSL and TLS ciphers
supported by the given server in colon-separated,
ordered format.
If an optional spec is provided via the
.Fl s
flag, then
.Nm
will also report on the differences between what the
server supports versus what the spec provides.
.Pp
If no
.Ar port
is specified,
.Nm
will connect to port 443 on the given server.
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options are supported by
.Nm :
.Bl -tag -width o_openssl_
.It Fl V
Print version information and exit.
.It Fl c
When reporting cipher preference differences, display
mismatches in color.
Ciphers missing on the server but found in the spec
will be printed in blue, extra ciphers offered by
the server but not found in the spec in magenta, ciphers
that are deprioritized by the server compared to the
spec in red, and ciphers that are preferred by the
server over the spec in yellow.
.Pp
This is really only useful if the provided and
observed specs are sufficiently similar.
.It Fl d
Report differences in the cipher preferences via
.Xr diff 1 .
.Pp
In this case, the cipher spec will be organized as a
line-break separated list and differences displayed in
\'unified' output.
.Pp
This flag implies
.Fl p .
.It Fl h
Display help and exit.
.It Fl l
List supported ciphers.
This is the default action.
If combined with
.Fl p ,
the result will be sorted in order of preference by
the server, otherwise alphabetically.
.It Fl u
List ciphers supported by the local
.Xr openssl 1
command, but not supported by the remote server.
.It Fl o Ar openssl
Use the
.Xr openssl 1
binary found in this location.
If not specified,
.Nm
will look in a conservatively set PATH of the usual
suspects.
.Ns ( Nm
will not honor your PATH environment variable since it
runs with taint checking turned on.)
.It Fl p
Perform a strict comparison to the given spec,
accounting for server preference.
This is slow (O(n^2) on the number of ciphers
supported by the
.Xr openssl 1
library), as numerous connections have to be made
to the server.
.It Fl s Ar spec
Diff the server's ciphersuite against the given spec.
.It Fl v
Be verbose.
Can be specified multiple times.
.El
.Sh DETAILS
Numerous tools exist to identify the different
cipher suites and SSL/TLS protocols supported by a
server.
However, in order to verify whether a remote server
matches an exact cipher spec, one needs to iterate
over all protocols and compare them to the given list.
.Pp
This process is very cumbersome, especially when
attempted at any larger scale.
.Nm
allows you to perform this task and report on the
differences in a more convenient manner.
It does so by making multiple connections using the
.Xr openssl 1
.Xr s_client 1
command and observing the cipher suite chosen by the
server.
.Pp
In order to be able to test support for a given cipher
suite, it necessarily must be supported by the local
client (i.e. the
.Xr openssl 1
library in use).
Results against the same server will thus vary
depending on which cipher suites your library
supports.
.Pp
Finally, when comparing a server's list of ciphers to
a provided spec,
.Nm
will generate no output if the two match and simply
return an exit status of 0.
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following examples illustrate common usage of this tool.
.Pp
To merely report the cipher suites supported by
www.example.com on port 1234:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ cipherdiff www.example.com 1234
.Ed
.Pp
To list the cipher suites supported by www.example.com
in port 443 in order of preference:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ cipherdiff -p www.example.com
ECDHE-RSA-AES128-GCM-SHA256:ECDHE-RSA-AES256-GCM-SHA384:...
.Ed
.Pp
To list the ciphers not supported by the server:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ cipherdiff -u www.example.com
CAMELLIA128-SHA:CAMELLIA256-SHA:DHE-DSS-AES128-GCM-SHA256:...
.Ed
.Pp
To compare the cipher preference on the server against
the one found in the file '/tmp/s':
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ cipherdiff -s $(cat /tmp/s) -p www.example.com
.Ns ...
.Ed
.Sh EXIT STATUS
The exit status of
.Nm
depends upon its invocation:
.Pp
When comparing cipher suites (i.e. the
.Fl s
flag was given), then
.Nm
will return an exit status of 0 if no differences were
found, an exit status of 1 if any errors were
encountered, and an exit status of 2 if differences
were found.
.Pp
When listing cipher suites,
.Nm
exits 0 on success, and >0 if an error occurred.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr openssl 1
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm
was originally written by
.An Jan Schaumann
.Aq jschauma@netmeister.org
in October 2016.
.Sh BUGS
Please file bugs and feature requests by emailing the author.
